--- PAGE 1 ---
NGO “KOSMOS TABIR”
Registration number: 43770084
47-B Kyrylivska street, Kyiv city, 04080 
+380633377966 
denny@kosmostabir.org 
NGO “Kosmos Tabir” 
innovation humanitarian solution
Mini Solar Power System for 
de-occupied areas in Ukraine
"Mini Solar Power Plants” is an innovative solution developed by 
NGO “Kosmos Tabir”. 
The main idea and goal is to equip all residential houses and 
administrative buildings with mini solar power stations, allowing 
devices to be charged for free, even without sunlight, at 5-12V. This 
includes smartphones, tablets, Wi-Fi routers, ﬂashlights, power 
banks, construction tools, walkie-talkies, and other equipment
 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Problematic:
In Ukraine, as a result of ongoing combat, over 475 
settlements* have been left without power, with most 
remaining continuously without electricity. This 
affects tens of thousands of households in the 
Kherson, Zaporizhzhia, Donetsk, Kharkiv, Sumy, and 
Chernihiv regions. People cannot contact their loved 
ones or doctors, and children are unable to receive an 
education.
This situation presents a signiﬁcant challenge to the 
humanitarian sector as a consequence of modern 
warfare, with the potential for similar situations to 
spread globally.
For example, in the Kherson region, more than 26,000 
households* remain consistently without electricity, 
with the majority having been without power for 
nearly three years.
*Data from the Ministry of Energy of Ukraine - July 
2024
--- PAGE 3 ---
Kherson region 
Up to 26,000 households with no electricity for almost 3 years
*Data from the Ministry of Energy of Ukraine - July 2024

--- PAGE 4 ---
At NGO “Kosmos Tabir” in the past year we have made 4 humanitarian missions to Kherson region, mostly Beryslav area — critical area which are shelled daily and have no electrical power
--- PAGE 5 ---
Іnstalled in the 
Berislav district:
30 small (0.5 kWt) 
batteries + solar 
station - one per 
village
400 Mini Solar 
Power Plants - one 
per household

--- PAGE 6 ---
400 Mini Solar 
Power Plants - 
one per 
household
Source in Facebook 
--- PAGE 7 ---
Just two week after we delivered our mini solar system, 
community center in the village of Beryslav area was hit by 
shrapnel from russian guided bomb that exploded near it
Our system still work ﬁne, even after bomb explosion near, 
solar panel was hit by shrapnels, but still works 
and charging phones and building instruments 
for fast renovation
So our system is stable and efﬁcient 
near the front line, that’s why we call it
an innovation humanitarian solution
Source:
Web page 
Kherson region
administration
End of August 2024
NGO Kosmos Tabir
End of August 2024
NGO Kosmos Tabir
Beginning of September 2024
khoda.gov.ua
--- PAGE 8 ---
For more than a year installing and testing 
it, we ﬁnally created innovative solar 
solution that we plan to give to every living 
household that was affected by war and 
needs electricity
--- PAGE 9 ---
What is mini Solar Power System and it works ?
Mini solar power system is built in similar to MPPT technology. It has inductor, capacitors, and 
switching components (like MOSFET). These converters adjust the input voltage to a desired output 
voltage efﬁciently. Difference that our system stabilise voltage for 5v/12v and 1-2A.
It have 4 USB outputs, 3 for 5v, 1-2A and 1 for 9-12v (automatic identiﬁcation) 
It goes with 10 meters outdoor solar (analog) cable 2х0.75mm with MC4 solar connectors 
It work with any solar panel - used, cracked, and even with gunshots or shrapnel damage
*(with voltage range 18v-60v of solar panel)
System is extremely simple and easy to install - understandable for the elderly as well as for 
children
Mini Solar Power System cost without panel is around 10-12€ which makes it simple and super 
useful solution with possibility to instal it on every living household near frontline and postwar 
(de-occupied) areas
--- PAGE 10 ---

--- PAGE 11 ---
Decentralised power in de-occupation and post war areas
Direct from Sun 
without battery use
What better to charge your laptop?
Extra transformation 
from 220v to 12v

--- PAGE 12 ---
Example - Test
Gunshots solar panel 
Trina Solar TSM-445DE17M(II) 445w 49v
*damage by shrapnel from russian tank and gunshots 
near Kyiv Area in 2022
Works ﬁne, have more than 50% from the 
starting efﬁciency
Tested for 4 month, system with 
gunshots panel works ﬁne, even with 
cloudy weather
In full power, system consume just 60-80 
watt.
For this case can be two system per one 
speciﬁc solar panel 
Same thing with used solar panel

--- PAGE 13 ---
Solar Panels Face Recycling Challenge in Europe 
1.  Lack of Standardization in Solar Panel Composition
2. Expensive to recycle, cheaper to keep in storage
3. Environmental and Health Risks of Current recycling technology
4. Regulatory Hurdles and Lack of Awareness
European study shows continent 
exports solar waste outside of EU
Because it’s not waste…
… for such areas as de-occupied regions in 
Ukraine, areas near the front line.
It's only one option to charge phone and to call  
relatives in many villages in Ukraine now 
Let’s give them a second life and lets give
electricity to people for Humanitarian purpose Pic source bbc.com  
--- PAGE 14 ---
It’s happening 
anyway, let’s give 
this issue 
reasonable and 
justiﬁed 
humanitarian 
purpose
Source pv-magazine
--- PAGE 15 ---
We don’t need new panels, we need used PV 
for living households near the frontline  
--- PAGE 16 ---
About us
Basically we are a creative community that transforms to humanitarian innovation 
projects
Meet us by pics and video tour 
Photo credit:NGO “Kosmos Tabir” community in culture trip to Herson region in 2020 by ГогольTrainNow all this area are at war and occupationFirst Art train in Europe - video from Mariupol 
--- PAGE 17 ---
Our partners on this humanitarian mission
Ministry 
of Energy of Ukraine
Institutional 
partners
Kherson regional 
state administration
Project partners
Kharkiv regional 
state administration
Ofﬁce of the 
President of Ukraine

--- PAGE 18 ---
What we need for humanitarian mission
We are looking for partnership with strong institutions, assoacians, NGOs, solar 
plants and companies - to collect used PV and solar equipment for Ukraine
Used Solar Panels
Not less than 200w and no 
less than 50% efﬁciency left.
Can be cracked or lightly 
damaged 
Also looking for Project partners to provide funding 
to living households for our system installations
Used Vans or Track
Can be old or cosmetic 
damage, but working
Used Inverters and batteries 
LiFePo4 batteries only, and not less 
than 60% efﬁciency left. 
Used solar inverters.
Used Solar Equipment 
Cables, fastening, crimpers

--- PAGE 19 ---
NGO “KOSMOS TABIR”
Registration number: 43770084
47-B Kyrylivska street, Kyiv city, 04080 
+380633377966 
denny@kosmostabir.org 
NGO “Kosmos Tabir” 
innovation humanitarian solution
Mini Solar Power System for de-occupied
areas in Ukraine
Denis Ugochuk 
Head of innovation humanitarian solutions atNGO "Kosmos Tabir"
+380633377966denny@kosmostabir.org
